# Unreleased changes

# 0.6.4 (_2020-12-16_)

## What's New

- Added backoff and retry support.

## What's Fixed

- Added db upgrade mechanism.

# 0.6.3 (_2020-12-09_)

## What's Fixed

- The uniffi-generated Kotlin bindings now compile correctly, thanks to an update to uniffi.

# 0.6.2 (_2020-12-08_)

## What's Fixed

- Removed unused `enrollment_id()` method, to silence dead-code warning when compiling in release mode.

# 0.6.1 (_2020-12-08_)

## What's Fixed

- Fixed spurious dead-code warning when compiling in release mode.

# 0.6.0 (_2020-12-08_)

## ⚠️ Breaking changes ⚠️

- Removed `NimbusClient.resetEnrollment`.
- `NimbusClient.{updateExperiments, optInWithBranch, optOut, setGlobalUserParticipation}`
  now return a list of telemetry events. Consumers should forward these events to their
  telemetry system (e.g. via Glean).

# 0.5.2 (_2020-12-10_)

## What's Changed

- Add filtering on application id.
- Addition of schema version to the schema, and validation of supported versions by the SDK.
- Removed implicit fetch of experiments on first use of the database. Consumers now must
  call update_experiments explicitly in order to fetch experiments from the Remote Settings
  server.

# 0.5.1 (_2020-11-10_)

## What's Changed

- Fix the version number in `Cargo.lock`.

# 0.5.0 (_2020-11-10_)

## What's New

- Added support for global opt-out via new method
  `NimbusClient.set_global_user_participation(bool)`

## What's Changed

- Updated uniffi and rkv dependencies to their latest
  release versions.
- Switched to using the "safe mode" backend for rkv;
  this can be disabled at build time by disabling the
  `rkv-safe-mode` feature.

# 0.4.0 (_2020-11-06_)

## What's Changed

- Removed use of unsigned types from the Kotlin API, since these
  are experimental and require opt-in from consuming apps.
- Fixed various warnings when compiling the Rust code.

# 0.3.0 (_2020-10-27_)

## What's New

Addition of CHANGELOG.md

The following are features that have been implemented as part of prototyping and initial development at some point prior to adding the changelog:

- Schema definition per the [shared schema repo](https://github.com/mozilla/nimbus-shared)
- Enrollment
  - Bucket randomization
  - Branch allocation
- Opt in/out
- Persistent storage of experiments
- Kotlin bindings generated by [uniffi](https://github.com/mozilla/uniffi-rs)
